Add Server Instructions content (#1334)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: blog/content/posts/2025-xx-xx-using-server-instructions.md

For 'global' instructions you always want the LLM to follow, instead of repeating them in multiple tool descriptions or prompts in a server, it can make more sense to include them in the model's system prompt instead.  This is where **server instructions** come in, to give the server a way to inject information that the LLM should always 'read' in order to understand how to use the server - independent of individual prompts, tools or messages.

**Note:** since the exact way that the host uses server instructions is up to the implementer (as a `MAY` in the spec), its not 100% guaranteed that they will be injected into the system prompt.  Its always recommended to evaluate a given clients behavior with your server and its tools before relying on this functionality.

## Implementing Server Instructions Example: Tool Preferences For Prompts

One specific personal example where this is helpful: I often create a combination of Prompts and embedded Resources as 'cheat sheets' which help assemble information from multiple sources including Confluence and GitHub.  I like to include these prompts in a MCP server so that I can re-use them easily in either an IDE or other apps.

> In this case, I want the LLM to always prioritize using Confluence and GitHub specific tools for getting certain internal information, rather than using more generic fetch or web search tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, I want the LLM to always prioritize using Confluence and GitHub-specific tools for getting certain internal information rather than using more generic fetch or web search tools.
```

TODO: add rest of example and grab screenshot of it working

## Implementing Server Instructions: General Tips For Server Developers

> One key to good instructions is focusing on **what tools/resources don't convey**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One key to good instructions is focusing on **what tools and resources don't convey**:
```

    }
    ```
    

### Anti-Patterns to Avoid

❌ **Don't repeat tool descriptions**:

```json
// Bad - duplicates what's in tool.description
"instructions": "The search tool searches for files. The read tool reads files."

// Good - adds relationship context
"instructions": "Use 'search' before 'read' to validate file paths. Search results expire after 10 minutes."
```

❌ **Don't include marketing or superiority claims**:

```json
// Bad
"instructions": "This is the best server for all your needs! Superior to other servers!"

// Good
"instructions": "Specialized for Python AST analysis. Not suitable for binary file processing."
```

❌ **Don't write a manual**:

```json
// Bad - too long and detailed
"instructions": "This server provides comprehensive functionality for... [500 words]"

// Good - concise and actionable
"instructions": "GitHub integration server. Workflow: 1) 'auth_github', 2) 'list_repos', 3) 'clone_repo'. API rate limits apply - check 'rate_status' before bulk operations."
```

### What Server Instructions Can't Do:

> - **Guarantee certain behavior:** As with any text you give to an LLM, your instructions aren't going to be followed the same way 100% of the time.  Anything you ask a model to do is like rolling a dice  The reliability of any instructions will vary based on randomness, sampling parameters, model, client implementation, other servers/tools at play, and many other variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Guarantee certain behavior:** As with any text you give to an LLM, your instructions aren't going to be followed the same way all the time.  Anything you ask a model to do is like rolling a dice. The reliability of any instructions will vary based on randomness, sampling parameters, model, client implementation, other servers and tools at play, and many other variables.
```

> 	- Given the above, don't rely on instructions for any critical 'must-do' actions that need to happen in conjunction with other actions, especially in security or privacy domains.  These are better implemented as deterministic rules or hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Don't rely on instructions for any critical actions that need to happen in conjunction with other actions, especially in security or privacy domains. These are better implemented as deterministic rules or hooks.
```

> - **Make up for suboptimal tool design:** Tool descriptions and other aspects of interface design for agents are still going to make or break how well LLMs can use your server, when they need to take an action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Account for suboptimal tool design:** Tool descriptions and other aspects of interface design for agents are still going to make or break how well LLMs can use your server when they need to take an action.
```

## Implementing Server Instructions: For Client Developers

> If you're a client developer, your job is a more complex, since it involves deciding how to incorporate instructions into what ultimately gets passed to the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're a client developer, your job is more complex, since it involves deciding how to incorporate instructions into what ultimately gets passed to the model.
```

${grouped.apiServers.map(s => `- ${s.name}: ${s.instructions}`).join('\n')}` : ''}`;
  }
}
```

#### 3. Priority-Based Composition

```javascript
// For multiple servers with potential conflicts
const instructions = servers
  .sort((a, b) => b.priority - a.priority)
  .map(s => s.instructions)
  .join('\n\n');
```

### User Control Implementation

#### Edit Dialog Example

```typescript
interface InstructionEditor {
  server: string;
  original: string;
  edited: string;
  enabled: boolean;
}

function InstructionEditDialog({ instruction }: { instruction: InstructionEditor }) {
  return (
    <Dialog>
      <DialogTitle>Edit Instructions: {instruction.server}</DialogTitle>
      <TextArea 
        value={instruction.edited}
        onChange={(e) => updateInstruction(e.target.value)}
      />
      <Checkbox 
        checked={instruction.enabled}
        label="Include these instructions"
      />
    </Dialog>
  );
}
```

### Client Implementation Checklist

- [ ] Validate instruction content for control sequences
- [ ] Implement user visibility of all instructions
- [ ] Add edit/disable capabilities
- [ ] Log instruction usage
- [ ] Set reasonable length limits

> - [ ] Sanitize before prompt injection

Author: I ended up removing the client section and just scoping this post to servers.

- [ ] Test with malicious instructions

> ## Which host applications support server instructions?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Currently Supported Host Applications
```

> At the time of writing, only a few host applications definitely support server instructions.  For a complete list, refer to the [Clients](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/clients) page in the MCP documentation.  Claude Code was used to demonstrate server instructions for this post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing only a few host applications support server instructions.  For a complete list, refer to the [Clients](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/clients) page in the MCP documentation.  Claude Code was used to demonstrate server instructions for this post.
```

For a basic demo of server instructions in action, you can use the [Everything reference server](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers/tree/main/src/everything) to confirm that your client supports this feature:

> 1. Install the Everything Server in your host: The link above includes instructions on how to do this in a few popular applications.  In the example below, we're using [Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/mcp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install the Everything Server in your host. The link above includes instructions on how to do this in a few popular applications.  In the example below, we're using [Claude Code](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/mcp).
```

2. Once you've confirmed that the server is connected, ask the model: `does the everything server tools have any special 
  instructions?`
3. If the model can see your instructions, you should get a response like the one below:

<img
    src="/posts/images/claude_code_instructions.JPG"
    alt="Screenshot of response which reads: Server instructions are working!"
  />

## Wrapping Up

> Although its just a simple text field, this post skimmed the surface of how `instructions` can be used and implemented in both MCP clients and servers.  Be sure to share your own examples, thoughts, and questions in the [channels mentioned here](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/community/communication).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although it's just a simple text field, this post skimmed the surface of how server instructions can be used and implemented in both MCP clients and servers.  Be sure to share your own examples, thoughts, and questions on [Discord](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/community/communication).
```
